Add proposal for Strimzi-native configurable RSA key sizes (#241)
strimzi/proposals: 152-configurable-ca-key-size.md

The remaining authorities mentioned above: ANSSI, NIST, and ASD ISM will follow by 2030–2031 when 2048-bit RSA keys are prohibited.

As described above, the existing workarounds do not fully address compliance requirements for all keys and both introduce significant operational complexity.

Adding a configurable key size is a minimal, backward-compatible change that allows these users to remain on Strimzi's built-in CA while meeting their compliance requirements.
  
## Proposal

### API changes

A new `keySize` property will be added to the `spec.clusterCa` and `spec.clientsCa` sections of the `Kafka` custom resource:

```yaml
apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1
kind: Kafka
metadata:
  name: my-cluster
spec:
  clusterCa:
    keySize: 4096
    validityDays: 365
    renewalDays: 30
  clientsCa:
    keySize: 4096
    validityDays: 365
    renewalDays: 30
  # ...
```

The `keySize` property controls the RSA key size in bits for **all** keys generated by Strimzi, both the root certificates and the leaf certificates.

This follows the same pattern as `validityDays` which also applies to all certificates managed under the CA.

#### Defaults and validation

> * **Default value:** `4096`, the current root certificate key size, preserving backward compatibility for root certificate keys.

Reviewer: Not sure the key size has anything to do with backwards compatibility as I assume we and all clients accept the usual key sizes.

Author: Fixed.

>   This will change the effective key size for leaf certificates from `2048` bits, OpenSSL's implicit default, to `4096` bits.

Reviewer 2: I am assuming that the reason we had 2 different keySize is that root CA keys are long-lived and high-impact if compromised, so they should be the strongest. Whereas, leaf keys are short-lived and is likely to be renewed frequently, so smaller keys are a reasonable trade-off for better TLS handshake performance. The default keySize would be increased to 4096, even though 3072 typically meets security requirements, so that we don't compromise root CA key strength. However, leaf keys are used on every TLS handshake, so this could have a performance impact for clients that may reconnect frequently? Also, are there scenarios where compliance regulations apply differently to CA keys vs leaf keys, requiring stronger keys for the CA but allowing smaller keys for leaf certs?

This make me wonder if we should add a per-KafkaUser keySize override for clients CA, similar to how validityDays and renewalDays work today after #214. This way users can configure smaller keySize for user certificates without affecting the CA key strength. What do you think?

Author: > I am assuming that the reason we had 2 different keySize is that root CA keys are long-lived and high-impact if compromised, so they should be the strongest. Whereas, leaf keys are short-lived and is likely to be renewed frequently, so smaller keys are a reasonable trade-off for better TLS handshake performance. 

I believe the CA keys were set to `4096` for security impact reasons, but I'm not sure the leaf keys were kept smaller for performance reasons. Since the leaf keys use OpenSSL's default, I think the decision was effectively outsourced to OpenSSL rather than being a deliberate performance trade-off.

> The default keySize would be increased to 4096, even though 3072 typically meets security requirements, so that we don't compromise root CA key strength. However, leaf keys are used on every TLS handshake, so this could have a performance impact for clients that may reconnect frequently?

It could but I think for most Kafka clusters the impact would be minimal since Kafka connections are long-lived and reconnections should be infrequent. Users could always set the key size lower and bring their own CA with a higher key size if this was a requirement. I imagine if a user really needed tighter security for the CA, they would bring their own CA anyway.

> Also, are there scenarios where compliance regulations apply differently to CA keys vs leaf keys, requiring stronger keys for the CA but allowing smaller keys for leaf certs?

Most of the security authorities mentioned in the `Motivation` section of the proposal (all except the CA/Browser Forum) set a uniform minimum key size and don't differentiate between CA and leaf key requirements. Even though the CA/Browser Forum does specify different key sizes, it's to ensure stronger protection for root CAs due to their higher security impact not to allow weaker leaf keys for performance reasons.

> This make me wonder if we should add a per-KafkaUser keySize override for clients CA, similar to how validityDays and renewalDays work today after https://github.com/strimzi/proposals/pull/214. This way users can configure smaller keySize for user certificates without affecting the CA key strength. What do you think?

For the leaf certificates used by KafkaUser clients correct? If so, yes I think that is reasonable. However, I think it is something we should keep out of scope for this proposal for simplicity's sake and add the feature in a follow-up proposal or PR. 

How does that sound to you?

Reviewer: I never heard about the cert size being a performance issue. The cipher suites would have much bigger performance impact. Unless we have some actual demand for different key sizes I would stick with one size.

Reviewer 2: ok thanks for the explanation. 
> For the leaf certificates used by KafkaUser clients correct? If so, yes I think that is reasonable. However, I think it is something we should keep out of scope for this proposal for simplicity's sake and add the feature in a follow-up proposal or PR.

I'm happy with this suggestion. We can add it if users ask for it in the feature.

  This is a deliberate change: relying on an implicit OpenSSL default is fragile and aligning leaf certificate keys with the root certificate key size is a safer baseline. For users who need the previous 2048-bit leaf key size, they can set keySize: `2048` explicitly.

> * **Minimum value:** `2048` since smaller RSA keys do not meet any current security standard and therefore should not be supported.

Reviewer: Why do we need to enforce minimum value? Is there some technical issue preventing smaller sizes?

Author: We don't need to, from what I understood, keys under 2048 bit keys are considered insecure by most current standards. That being said, you could argue it is not necessarily Strimzi's job to enforce key size and I would agree with you on that. 

I removed the minimum requirement in the latest commit.

#### Interaction with cert-manager integration (proposal 100)

When the `spec.clusterCa.type` and/or `spec.clientsCa.type` is set to `cert-manager.io` in the `Kafka` custom resource (as described in [Strimzi proposal 100: "External Certificate Manager"](100-external-certificate-manager.md)), Strimzi delegates certificate issuance and private key generation to cert-manager.
In this case, `keySize` only affects the leaf certificate keys that cert-manager generates.
Strimzi will use the value of `keySize` to populate the `spec.privateKey.size` field in the `Certificate` resource it creates.
Then, cert-manager will read that `Certificate` resource to configure and generate the leaf certificate keys.
The `keySize` field does not affect the root certificate keys since those are configured by the user through the `Certificate` resources that the user creates, which are outside Strimzi's control.

### Implementation

Following the existing pattern established by `validityDays` we would add a `keySize` field to `CertificateAuthority.java` like this:

```java
public class CertificateAuthority implements UnknownPropertyPreserving {
    //... existing fields

>     public static final int DEFAULT_KEY_SIZE = 4096;

Reviewer: Why do we need to keep the default here?

Author: We don't, that should live in the operator code, removing.

>     public static final int DEFAULT_KEY_SIZE = 4096;

Reviewer: Why do we need to keep the default here?

Author: We don't, that should live in the operator code, removing.

    }
    // ... existing methods 
}
```

#### User Operator considerations

The `keySize` for the clients CA must be forwarded to the User Operator so it can generate `KafkaUser` certificates with the correct key size.
This will be done by adding a new environment variable `STRIMZI_CLIENTS_CA_KEY_SIZE` to the Entity Operator deployment set by the Cluster Operator based on the `spec.clientsCa.keySize` value in the `Kafka` resource.

### Behavior on key size change

When a user changes the `keySize` on an existing cluster`:

* **No immediate key regeneration.** Changing `keySize` alone does not trigger an immediate root key replacement or leaf certificate regeneration.
  The new key size takes effect the next time a key is generated during root key replacement (triggered by `certificateExpirationPolicy: replace-key` at renewal time or a manual force-replace annotation) or when new leaf certificates are issued (e.g. scaling up, adding a new `KafkaUser`).
* **Existing certificates remain valid.** Certificates generated with the previous key size continue to function until they are naturally renewed or replaced.
  This avoids unnecessary rolling restarts.

> * **Gradual rollout.** To immediately apply a new key size to all certificates, the user should:

Reviewer: It is not really gradual rollout if the user has to do something?

Author: Yes you are right, that should say "Immediate" rollout, fixing.

  1. Set the desired `keySize` in the `Kafka` resource.

>   2. Trigger a root key replacement using the `strimzi.io/force-replace` annotation on the root key Secret.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  2. Trigger a CA private key replacement using the `strimzi.io/force-replace` annotation on the `<cluster-name>-cluster-ca` Secret.
```

Author: Fixed.

>   This will generate a new root key with the configured size and trigger re-issuance of all leaf certificates followed by rolling restarts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  This will generate and rollout a new CA private key with the configured size and trigger re-issuance of all leaf certificates followed by rolling restarts.
```

Author: Fixed.

## Affected/not affected projects

**Affected:**
* `api/` — `CertificateAuthority` model, CRD schema
* `certificate-issuer/` — `CertIssuer` interface, `OpenSslCertIssuer`
* `operator-common/` — `Ca`, `InternalCa`, `CaConfig`
* `cluster-operator/` — `CaReconciler`
* `user-operator/` — `KafkaUserModel` (reads key size from environment variable)
* `documentation/` — API reference, deploying guide (certificate configuration section)

## Compatibility

This change is **backward compatible**:

* The `keySize` property defaults to `4096` when not set, matching the current root key size.
* For leaf keys, the effective default changes from `2048` (OpenSSL implicit) to `4096` (Strimzi explicit).
  This is a behavioral change, but it is in the direction of stronger security and only affects newly generated leaf keys, the existing certificates are not regenerated. Users who need to preserve 2048-bit leaf keys can set keySize: 2048 explicitly.
* No existing `Kafka` custom resources need to be modified.
* No rolling restarts are triggered by the introduction of this feature alone.

## Rejected alternatives

### Separate key sizes for root and leaf certificates

> Having two properties (e.g., `caKeySize` and `certKeySize`) was considered to allow independent control over root and leaf key sizes.

Reviewer 2: We have this [issue](https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator/issues/12765) raised to address a problem with validityDays and renewalDays by separating these internally for at least KafkaUser certificates. This might be something to consider for the implementation but also makes me wonder if we should reconsider separating CA cert and end-entity cert configurations in general.

Author: > This might be something to consider for the implementation

Thanks for the heads up. I'll pay close attention to this during the implementation regardless of whether the implementation lands before or after the CA refactor work. (I'll coordinate with you and Kate on this)

> also makes me wonder if we should reconsider separating CA cert and end-entity cert configurations in general.

I was thinking about this as well while putting this proposal together.  Separating the configurations would give users more flexibility; however, I'm not sure there has been much ask for it. Given it would require an API redesign and add complexity to the codebase, and there hasn't been much demand for separate configurations (as far as I know) I would leave it as it is for now.

# Strimzi-native Configurable Certificate Key Strength

This proposal adds a `keySize` property to the `CertificateAuthority` configuration in the `Kafka` custom resource allowing users to configure the RSA key size used by Strimzi's internal CAs for both the CA keys themselves and the certificate keys they issue.
For differentiating between CA certificates and certificates **issued** by a CA, the proposal uses the following terms: 
- **Root certificates**: The CA certificates.

> - **Leaf certificates**: The certificates **issued** by a CA, also known as end-entity (EE) certificates, the certificates used to identify the Kafka brokers, Strimzi Operators, Cruise Control, and KafkaUser components.

Reviewer 3: "KafkaUser components" ... what are they? I guess CO, TO and UO are included in "Strimzi Operators"?

Author: > "KafkaUser components" ... what are they?

Let me use "clients" here instead of components

>  I guess CO, TO and UO are included in "Strimzi Operators"?

Yes!

Just updated the text in latest commit to make this more clear

Adding a configurable key size is a minimal, backward-compatible change that allows these users to remain on Strimzi's built-in CA while meeting their compliance requirements.
  
## Proposal

### API changes

A new `keySize` property will be added to the `spec.clusterCa` and `spec.clientsCa` sections of the `Kafka` custom resource:

```yaml
apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1
kind: Kafka
metadata:
  name: my-cluster
spec:
  clusterCa:
    keySize: 3072
    validityDays: 365
    renewalDays: 30
  clientsCa:
    keySize: 3072
    validityDays: 365
    renewalDays: 30
  # ...
```

The `keySize` property controls the RSA key size in bits for **all** keys generated by Strimzi, both the root certificates and the leaf certificates.

This follows the same pattern as `validityDays` which also applies to all certificates managed under the CA.

#### Defaults and validation

* **Default value:** `3072`, which meets all current and upcoming regulatory requirements (≥3000-bit RSA keys).
  This changes the effective key size for root keys from `4096` (Strimzi's current hardcoded value) to `3072`.

>   This will change the effective key size for leaf certificates from `2048` bits, OpenSSL's implicit default, to `3072` bits.

Reviewer 3: I can understand that 3072 is big enough for the requirements but to be honest using it as default means reducing the current security of the root certificates (while increasing the security for leaf certificates only). I would default to 4096. AFAICS the mathematical max key lenght for RSA seems to be 15360 so users could be over or less but for me default should be 4096.

Author: Just updated default to 4096 bits in latest commit.

  For users who need the previous 2048-bit leaf key size, they can set `keySize: 2048` explicitly.

* **Allowed values:** `2048`, `3072`, `4096`, `8192` which are standard RSA key sizes that are well-supported by OpenSSL and Java's `java.security` libraries.
  These values will be enforced by CRD schema validation using an `enum` constraint.

> * **Minimum value:** `2048` since smaller RSA keys do not meet any current security standard and therefore should not be supported.

Reviewer: Is there any actual technical reason why to control these so tightly? The regulations you listed earlier - some of them suggest `≥3000` as the size. So I assume 3000 bit size would work technically?

Author: > Is there any actual technical reason why to control these so tightly?

I was initially thinking of it as a guardrail for users. That being said, if users are changing this configuration, they probably know what they are doing and would appreciate the flexibility.

> So I assume 3000 bit size would work technically?

That is a fair point. 3072 would make a better default as it meets security compliance requirements and is better for performance.

I have just removed the enum restriction and updated the default keySize to `3072` in the latest commit.

Reviewer: You can use documentation to point users to the common sizes (frankly, never heard about anyone actually using 3072)

Author: That sounds good to me, Just added an additional note for this in the latest commit.

Reviewer 3: I tried to run the openssl command with several key sizes and it doesn't allow to go under 512, giving the following error:

```shell
Error setting RSA length
00930224877F0000:error:1C8000AB:Provider routines:rsa_gen_set_params:key size too small:providers/implementations/keymgmt/rsa_kmgmt.c:520:
```

So maybe we should have a minimum to avoid this failure.

Reviewer: That might be an actual technical limitation. But what about Cert Manager where this would apply as well?

Reviewer 3: I found this within the cert-manager codebase https://github.com/cert-manager/cert-manager/blob/master/pkg/util/pki/generate.go#L36 It seems to force 2048 bits as minimum.

Reviewer 3: Also in the doc https://cert-manager.io/docs/reference/api-docs/ if you go down to `CertificatePrivateKey` it states:

> Size is the key bit size of the corresponding private key for this certificate.
If algorithm is set to RSA, valid values are 2048, 4096 or 8192, and will default to 2048 if not specified. If algorithm is set to ECDSA, valid values are 256, 384 or 521, and will default to 256 if not specified. If algorithm is set to Ed25519, Size is ignored. No other values are allowed.

Which sounds like it doesn't allow anything else like weird values i.e. 1346 which is allowed by openssl instead.

Reviewer: Hmm, so how do we best handle it? 🤔

Author: I could add the CRD validation annotation back in: `@Minimum(2048)`. From what I understand, values under `2048` are not considered to be cryptographically safe by any security authority anyway.

How does everyone feel about that?

Reviewer: Well, it sounds like OpenSSL supports lover values without any issues.

Author: Alternatively, what if we referenced the minimum supported bits of OpenSSL and cert-manager in our documentation, with links to their respective documentation as a guide for users configuring `keySize`?

Would that be suitable?

Reviewer: Yeah, I guess we can keep the minimum as 512 and document the rest.

Reviewer 3: I think we don't have many solutions here. Setting the minimum to what we provide as built-in mechanism (openssl) sounds reasonable to me. The rest can be just documented (even for future other cert managers integration, if any).

Author: Let me add a commit with this information and then we will be good to go

Author: Alright, added a minimum annotation for CRD validation and a note about adding documentation as part of the validation.

If that change looks ok, we should be clear to move forward

Reviewer: I think that looks good.

Reviewer: Thanks.

When the `spec.clusterCa.type` and/or `spec.clientsCa.type` is set to `cert-manager.io` in the `Kafka` custom resource (as described in [Strimzi proposal 100: "External Certificate Manager"](100-external-certificate-manager.md)), Strimzi delegates certificate issuance and private key generation to cert-manager.
In this case, `keySize` only affects the leaf certificate keys that cert-manager generates.
Strimzi will use the value of `keySize` to populate the `spec.privateKey.size` field in the `Certificate` resource it creates.
Then, cert-manager will read that `Certificate` resource to configure and generate the leaf certificate keys.
The `keySize` field does not affect the root certificate keys since those are configured by the user through the `Certificate` resources that the user creates, which are outside Strimzi's control.

### Implementation

Following the existing pattern established by `validityDays` we would add a `keySize` field to `CertificateAuthority.java` like this:

```java
public class CertificateAuthority implements UnknownPropertyPreserving {
    //... existing fields
    public static final int DEFAULT_KEY_SIZE = 4096;

    // ... existing fields 

>     private int keySize;

Reviewer: Didn't you said earlier that it is an Enum? To be clear, I would probably prefer int without restrictions (see the previous comment). But trying to figure out the inconsistency.

Author: Yes, that was oversight, I intended it as an enum as a guardrail for users. That being said, if users are changing this configuration, they probably know what they are doing and would appreciate the flexibility.

I have just removed the enum restriction in the latest commit.

### Behavior on key size change

When a user changes the `keySize` on an existing cluster, the behavior depends on the `certificateExpirationPolicy`:

* **No immediate key regeneration.** Changing `keySize` alone does not trigger an immediate root key replacement or leaf certificate regeneration.
  The new key size takes effect the next time a key is generated during root key replacement (triggered by `certificateExpirationPolicy: replace-key` at renewal time or a manual force-replace annotation) or when new leaf certificates are issued (e.g. scaling up, adding a new `KafkaUser`).
* **Existing certificates remain valid.** Certificates generated with the previous key size continue to function until they are naturally renewed or replaced.
  This avoids unnecessary rolling restarts.
* **Gradual rollout.** To immediately apply a new key size to all certificates, the user should:
  1. Set the desired `keySize` in the `Kafka` resource.
  2. Trigger a root key replacement using the `strimzi.io/force-replace` annotation on the root key Secret.

>   This will generate a new root key with the configured size and trigger re-issuance of all leaf certificates followed by rolling restarts.

Reviewer: I assume the same applies to the changed default during upgrade when this proposal is implemented? Should be clear from the proposal.

Author: Yes, thanks for noticing, you are right, I have just added a line for this in the latest commit

Exposing keySize as a configurable field lets users choose the right balance for their environment.

## Affected/not affected projects

**Affected:**
* `api/` — `CertificateAuthority` model, CRD schema
* `certificate-issuer/` — `CertIssuer` interface, `OpenSslCertIssuer`
* `operator-common/` — `Ca`, `InternalCa`, `CaConfig`
* `cluster-operator/` — `CaReconciler`
* `user-operator/` — `KafkaUserModel` (reads key size from environment variable)
* `documentation/` — API reference, deploying guide (certificate configuration section)

## Compatibility

This change is **backward compatible**:

* The `keySize` property defaults to `4096` when not set, matching the current root key size.
* For leaf keys, the effective default changes from 2048 (OpenSSL implicit) to 4096 (Strimzi explicit).
  This is a behavioral change, but it is in the direction of stronger security and only affects newly generated leaf keys, the existing certificates are not regenerated.
  Users who need to preserve 2048-bit leaf keys can set `keySize: 2048` explicitly.
* No existing `Kafka` custom resources need to be modified.

> * No rolling restarts are triggered by the introduction of this feature alone.

Reviewer: What happens when downgrading from Strimzi with default 4096 bit key to older version with default 2048? I assume the old 4096 bit keys will continue to be used until the renewal? Worth clarifying in the proposal.

Author: Yes, thanks for noticing, you are right, I have just added a line for this in the latest commit.
